\section{Live sanitisation}
\label{sec:sanitization}

\begin{figure}[t]
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[width=0.75\columnwidth]{applications/figures/live-sanitization}
    \caption{The use of event-streaming architecture for live sanitisation.}
    \label{fig:live-sanitization}
  \end{center}
\end{figure}

Sanitisation is one of the most effective testing techniques for revealing
low-level bugs such as uninitialised pointer dereferences and use-after-free
errors.  Both Clang and GNU C Compiler now include a set of
sanitisers---AddressSanitizer (ASan), MemorySanitizer (MSan), ThreadSanitizer
(TSan)---which can be used to statically instrument the code with various
checks.  Unfortunately, these checks introduce extra overhead (\eg $~2\times$
for ASan, $~3\times$ for MSan and $~5$-$15\times$ for TSan).  which is why
these sanitisers are typically only used in an offline testing. However, during
testing developers only use a limited set of inputs which might not reveal all
bugs.

One possible solution is to record execution traces during deployment and then
replay them in a testing environment with sanitisation enabled. However, this
approach is unlikely to work in practice for several reasons. First, since we
do not know in advance which traces are potentially interesting (\eg trigger
sanitisation checks) and which are not, we have to potentially collect and
replay a huge number of execution traces. Even with some form of deduplication,
this is usually impractical. Second, for long-running applications such as
servers, the log size will quickly grow to a large size. Third, many customers
will refuse to share the logs from their production deployment.

With \varan, we can perform live sanitisation by running the native unsanitised
version as the leader, with sanitised versions as followers, as shown in
Figure~\ref{fig:live-sanitization}.  While sanitisation itself introduces a
performance overhead, since followers do not need to execute any I/O operations
and merely replay them, they can often keep up with the leader, allowing users
to run sanitised versions in production without introducing any significant
overhead.

To demonstrate this, we build revision \lstinline`7f77235` of \redis twice:
once using Clang without any sanitisation, once with ASan enabled.  We then ran
both versions in parallel using \varan and used the same benchmark with the
same settings as for our performance evaluation (\S\ref{sec:c10k}). As
expected, we have not measured any additional slowdown in the leader compared
to the scenario with two non-sanitised versions being run in parallel. To get a
better insight into the effect of running the sanitised version with \varan, we
have measured the median length of the log, \ie the distance between the leader
and the follower. With sanitisation, this length increases from
\redisNoSanitizationMedianLength to \redisSanitizationMedianLength, which does
not impose any problems.
