\chapter{Overview}
\label{chap:overview}

With the growing size of the modern computer software systems, the number of
errors present in such systems has increased.  Moreover, with increasing size
of the code base, the possibility of finding bugs, both manually and
automatically, is decreasing very rapidly. On the other hand, increasing
reliance on computers and computer software systems in every aspect of human
life implies a strong need for reliable software systems.

Software updates are an integral part of the software maintenance process, but
unfortunately present a high risk, with many users and administrators refusing
to upgrade their software and relying instead on outdated versions, which often
leaves them and their systems exposed to software bugs and security
vulnerabilities.

The Hearbleed bug~\cite{heartbleed} is a prime example of this behaviour. A
fixed version of OpenSSL was released on the same day the Heartbleed bug was
publicly disclosed.  However, a month after the publication, despite the wide
media coverage, 1.5\% (12,043) of the 800,000 most popular sites in the world
were still using the vulnerable version of OpenSSL, making their servers
susceptible to attacks~\cite{heartbleed-prevalent}.

Nowadays, many services including large-scale ones such as Google, Facebook or
Amazon employ \emph{continuous deployment}, whereby new versions are
continuously released to users~\cite{johnson2009}. Multiple versions can be
released throughout the day, and each version is often accessible only to a
fraction of users to prevent complete outage in case of an error caused by one
of the new versions.

While this approach helps minimize the number of users affected by newly
introduced bugs, it is not foolproof---bugs introduced by new releases may
manifest themselves only in particular cases or following prolonged operation,
after the release has been deployed to the entire user base. Errors and
failures affecting the majority of the user-base therefore occur even in these
applications. Such outages might cause significant financial losses and
frustration among users, and it is therefore critical to avoid them.

The incident cause by the air traffic control failure in December 2014, which
disrupted hundreds of flights to and from London airports, is a prime example.
According to the interim report published by the official enquiry
panel~\cite{natsfailure}, this incident was caused by system update in November 2014,
which changed the number of available ``Atomic Functions''. Due to a latent
defect, present in the system since its original development in 1990, this
update caused the failure of the entire system following the action of the air
traffic control, despite existing safety mechanism.

Another example of such disruption is the recent Verizon
outage~\cite{verizon-outage2014} of the billing and activation system,
affecting a large number of users which were unable to log into their accounts.
After the incident, Verizon issued the following statement:
\begin{quotation}
The Verizon Wireless billing system was fully restored early today, shortly
after midnight. The issue affecting some customer access to account information
was an unintended consequence of a software update performed by the company on
its billing system two days ago.
\end{quotation}
The outage, which according to reports lasted for 48 hours, was so impactful
that it generated a lot of negative reactions from frustrated customers
including its own \textsf{\#verizonfail} and \textsf{\#verizonoutage} Twitter
hashtags.  This as well as other similar incidents (\eg
Blogger~\cite{blogger-incident2011} or Facebook~\cite{facebook-incident2010})
show the possible consequences of failed software updates.

The problems caused by failed software updates are not restricted to services.
\lighttpd,\footnote{\url{http://www.lighttpd.net/}} a popular web server used
by numerous popular websites such as xkcd\footnote{\url{http://xkcd.com/}},
introduced a bug, while trying to fix another bug in the implementation of HTTP
ETags functionality, which caused the server crash on some configurations.
This bug remained undetected for nine months, affecting number of users, and it
took another three months to diagnose and fix the underlying
issue.\footnote{\url{http://redmine.lighttpd.net/issues/2169}}

The desktop applications are affected by failed software updates as well.
\vim,\footnote{\url{http://www.vim.org/}} arguably one of the most popular text
editors, shipped with the popular Ubuntu Linux distribution has been also
affected by failed software updates in the past. In version 7.1.127, while
trying to fix a memory leak, \vim developers introduced a double \textstt{free}
bug that caused \vim to crash whenever the user tried to use a path completion
feature.  This bug made its way into Ubuntu 8.04, affecting a large number of
users.\footnote{\url{https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/vim/+bug/219546}}

\input{overview/problem}
\input{overview/organisation}
\input{overview/publications}
